.. _dashboard-general:

UCS Dashboard
=============

The :program:`UCS Dashboard` app allows administrators to view the state of the
domain and individual servers can be read quickly and clearly on so-called
dashboards. The dashboards are accessible via a web browser, access a database
in the background, and deliver continuously updated reports on specific aspects
of the domain or server.

.. _dashboard-installation:

Installation
------------

The UCS Dashboard consists of three parts:

UCS Dashboard
   The *UCS Dashboard* app for the visualization of data from the central
   Database. This component is based on the software `Grafana
   <grafana_>`_ [1]_.

UCS Dashboard Database
   The *UCS Dashboard Database* app, a time series database for storing of the
   metrics. This database is based on the software Prometheus.

UCS Dashboard Client
   The *UCS Dashboard Client* app for deploying the metrics of server systems.
   This is based on the Prometheus Node Exporter.

The app *UCS Dashboard* can be installed from the Univention App Center on a
server in the domain. Currently, the installation is only possible on the system
roles Primary, Backup or |UCSREPLICADN|. The apps *UCS Dashboard Database* and
*UCS Dashboard Client* are automatically installed on the same system.

The app *UCS Dashboard Client* should be installed on every UCS system. Only
then will the system data be displayed on the dashboard.

.. _dashboard-usage:

Usage
-----

After the installation, the UCS Dashboard is linked in the portal.
Alternatively, it can be accessed directly via
:samp:`https://{SERVERNAME-OR-IP}/ucs-dashboard/`.

By default access is only granted to users of the group ``Domain Admins`` (e.g.
the user Administrator).

.. _dashboard-use-domain:

Domain dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _dashboard-domain:

.. figure:: /images/dashboard-domain.*
   :alt: Domain dashboard

   Domain dashboard

After the login, the *Domain Dashboard* is opened by default. On this dashboard,
general information about the domain is displayed, such as how many servers and
how many users exist in the environment.

Furthermore, the UCS systems are listed on the dashboard, in a tabular overview,
including further information, such as the server role, the installed apps or
whether an update is available or not.

In addition, the CPU usage, memory usage, free hard disk space and the status of
the LDAP replication are displayed. In this graphics all servers are displayed
together.

.. _dashboard-use-server:

Server dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _dashboard-server:

.. figure:: /images/dashboard-server.*
   :alt: Server dashboard

   Server dashboard

By default, the *Server Dashboard* is also configured. On this dashboard,
detailed information about individual server systems are shown, such as the CPU-
or memory usage or network throughput.

The servers can be selected in the drop down *server*. Then the graphics show the
details about the selected server.

.. _dashboard-usage-mydashboard:

Own dashboards
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The two included dashboards *Domain Dashboard* and *Server Dashboard* can't be
changed, because they are updated by Univention with updates.

Instead, you can create your own dashboards. On these dashboards you can then
either add already existing elements or new elements can be created. All you
need to do is click on the plus sign on the left side. A new dashboard will be
created which can be filled with elements.

.. [1]
   The Grafana Labs Marks are trademarks of Grafana Labs, and are used with
   Grafana Labsâ€™ permission. We are not affiliated with, endorsed or sponsored
   by Grafana Labs or its affiliates.
